“When we see the Earth from space we see ourselves as a whole; we see the unity and not the divisions. It is such a simple image, with a compelling message:

“One planet, one human race”.

In a press release issued this morning, the European Space Agency (ESA) has reminded a world struck by COVID-19—on the 50th anniversary of the first Earth Day—of a unifying message it beamed to the nearest known black hole.

The occasion was the memorial service at Westminster Abbey, London of Prof. Stephen Hawking, the British astrophysicist. On June 15, 2018 the ESA beamed the message from its deep space radio antenna in Cebreros, Spain.

The ESA’s press release, issued today, reads:

“On 22 April 2020, Earth Day, we’re transmitting this poignant message to all of planet Earth as a message of hope, to say that, by working together, we can overcome this crisis and others facing humankind.”

The message—Stephen Hawking’s final message to humankind—was set to a new piece of music by Greek composer Vangelis.

It’s expected to reach the black hole—1A 0620-00 in the constellation of Monoceros (close to Orion’s Belt) —in around 3,500 years.

Prof. Stephen Hawking’s message reads:

“I am very aware of the preciousness of time. Seize the moment. Act now.

“I have spent my life travelling across the Universe inside my mind. Through theoretical physics I have sought to answer some of the great questions, but there are other challenges, other big questions which must be answered, and these will also need a new generation who are interested, engaged and with an understanding of science.

“How will we feed an ever-growing population, provide clean water, generate renewable energy, prevent and cure disease and slow down global climate change?

“I hope that science and technology will provide the answers to these questions, but it will take people, human beings with knowledge and understanding to implement the solution.

“One of the great revelations of the space age has been a perspective that has given humanity on ourselves. When we see the Earth from space we see ourselves as a whole; we see the unity and not the divisions. It is such a simple image, with a compelling message: one planet, one human race.

“We are here together, and we need to live together with tolerance and respect. We must become global citizens.


Flowers are placed alongside the ashes of British scientist Stephen Hawking at the site of ... [+] internment in the nave of Westminster Abbey on June 15, 2018 in London, England. The world renowned physicist and author of A Brief History of Time, died early in the morning of 14 March 2018, at the age of 76. Professor Hawking's ashes will be laid to rest close to Sir Isaac Newton and Charles Darwin in the nave of Westminster Abbey. (Photo by Ben Stansall - WPA Pool /Getty Images)

Getty Images
“I have been enormously privileged through my work to be able to contribute to our understanding of the Universe. But it would be an empty Universe indeed, if it were not for the people I love and who love me.

“We are all time travellers journeying together into the future. But let us work together to make that future a place we want to visit. Be brave, be determined, overcome the odds. It can be done.

“It can be done.”

Text and narration: Prof. Stephen Hawking (© The Estate of Stephen Hawking)

The ESA also marked Earth Day by 2020 by compiling its archive of Earth Observation images and a reminder that there remains a need for action on climate change after COVID-19.

Wishing you clear skies and wide eyes.